---
title: "Introduction: building a database system from scratch"
date: 2019-05-28T07:09:00+00:00
draft: false
---

Database systeme are ubiquitus today. Every developer need to interact with one at some point, but the level of understanding I see in other and myself about database system is very low. It is surprising that such widely used system is so little understood by its user.

In order to fix that, I wanted to explore how a database system is build so that I can better use one.


What are we trying to build?

Why are we trying to build this?


Build step by step

Tested

Benchmarked


# Goals

Build a database system from the ground up, starting from the persistance in hdd or ssd

complete implementation of a realistic RDBMS, including B-trees, its internal architecture, cursors, compilation of SQL queries, and query optimization. Ours is one on the only projects that spans all these layers, providing an integral view of the entire RDBMS.

allows students to engage directly with concepts that are typically only covered in the abstract. Notably, our internal representation of SQL queries is based on relational algebra (containing sigma, pi and rho abstract syntax tree nodes, for example), reinforcing in a working system what the students have otherwise seen only on paper. The relational algebra is, furthermore, an especially congenial representation for both reasoning about and implementing query optimizations.

It must be structured in such a way that students can focus on database-specific implementation tasks, with an apparent connection to the theory of databases, without getting bogged down in orthogonal and un- interesting implementation details.

For example, a possible new assignment could involve adding support for concurrent access and transactions. 

The students emerge with what we hope and expect is a relatively deep understanding of the diverse machinery that needs to come together for data to be stored on disk in a sensible way and efficiently retrieved by queries. Furthermore, having implemented basic SQL queries “only” up to natural join and indexes, students develop a great appreciation for the achievements of a full SQL compiler. In other words, the knowledge and experience the students gain is well beyond what they would get merely by writing and executing SQL queries, however serpentine and clever those queries might be. 

 Second, academic treatment of database systems often ignores architectural issues. Textbook presentations of database systems traditionally focus on algorithmic and theoretical issues — which are natural to teach, study, and test — without a holistic discussion of system architecture in full implementations. In sum, much conventional wisdom about how to build database systems is available, but little of it has been written down or communicated broadly.

 Who am I?

